+++
title = "The Burden of Fascination"
date = 2019-07-20T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

Something I have noticed about myself is that I am seeminly capable
of great things when I am excited about them. This is likely not a
unique thing, but what might be more specific to me is the the gulf
between me when I am interested in something and when I am just
normal. Work that could take 15mins when I am very interested in
something at least seems to take more like 45mins when I am not. Add
a layer of dread around the work and we can add more time probably.

I have noticed this intuitively for much of my life and it has made
me kind of superstitious. I have developed several funny quirks to
help me try to control my level of interest. One for instance is
that if I have an idea, I am hesitant to tell it to other people
until it is fully developed because I am afraid that I will lose the
steam I might need to write it down. I will be engrossed in
explaining it to another person and then feel like any writing I do
later is a boring recap. This habit has made me a bit cagey about
talking about ideas at times and also maybe a little overly
performance focused as well. Because if performance is what is most
crucial for recognition then I should save my thoughts for that. My
fear has been that otherwise my ideas and interests will die on the
vine half developed.

Now I have a few other tricks to help with this as well. Another is
to try to cultivate a mental image that is attractive for the act of
doing some sort of work. If I can create a system of meaning for
something that I am doing then I can have an easier time finding it
interesting. This helps, but it makes me feel like a slave to my
curiousity and other passions. I am not sure what to do to alleviate
this difficulty as well.

I have experience with the just do it anyway approach and it does
work. However, my experience of the quality of the work seems so
much lower in those times. I say experience because the work I have
done in those situations is often not too bad, but I do not feel
that is connected to something important at the same time. I don't
have peace about doing it.

When something is fascinating to me it is like all of the questions
and answers line up and I feel that I have something real to share
with others. When something does not feel this way it feel like a
plodding forward that is ultimately futile. I can still do work, but
it is truly a labor.

Now I realize maybe what I should just do is be willing to accept
both of these ways of working as part of life. What interests me
though I guess is how I can be a bit less of a slave to fascination,
and also where the fascination comes from and what kills it. This is
even more interesting to me right now because I find myself having
more interest in somethings than I have had for awhile. I wonder
why?
