+++
title = "The fear of God and therapeutic spirituality"
date = 2022-05-23T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

<span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2022-04-19 Tue] </span></span>
One of my favorite thinkers is Soren Kierkegaard. He is quite
creative and this is in large part because he is always theorizing
based on his own experiences and frustrations. He was no abstract
theorist and was deeply critical of ideas like some of those
proposed by Hegel that made the individual just part of the whole.
However, Kierkegaard stole an idea from Hegel (well actually more
than one). This was the notion of Aufhebung. It is a nuanced idea,
but more or less we can think of it as a consuming or transcending
of your opposite but in such away that it is persevered.
Kierkegaard made use of this notion in particular with his idea of
life stages. He spoke about the aesthetic, the ethical, and the
religious. Each of these contains the best of those below it
without their drawbacks. However, they are not exactly similar.
There is a qualitative shift in motivation and goal in each of
them.

This is sort of a funny introduction, but this idea of qualitative
shift is very useful. It is the kind of thing that we get stuck
with when we are devoted to something that is getting in the way of
what we want. For example, when you are really chasing the
productivity dragon and you have worn yourself out doing so, you
decide to take a rest to be more productive. However, you discover
over time that your rest is not able to do its job because you are
always trying to force it to well do a job for you. For rest to be
rest you would need to have a qualitative shift in understanding
it. Until you step out of your paradigm of work, rest will only ever
be just a strange kind of work. However, once you do, rest can be
the thing you have been needing it to be.

I think we can say something similar of the therapeutic's
relationship to the spiritual. To make a broad statement that
probably deserves a great deal of qualification, a dominant view of
the human endeavor these days is that of a sort of individualistic
pragmatic self-expression. It has a positive and negative form. On
the positive side there is the notion that we can make use of
anything that does not harm others to the pursuit of our happiness
and self actualization. A lot has been written about this already
so I will leave this aside for now. However, the negative side I
think is probably more of a daily companion for must of us. It is
more or less summed up by the phrase "do whatever gets you through
the day". Where on the one hand we have the idea of self-determined
self-expression on the other we have an ethic of existential pain
management.

With the dominant picture of human life being that it is beautiful,
tragic, meaningless, and only material. These two options are very
at home. They are reasonable responses to this picture. And this
picture is very persuasive. However, it leads to some funny things
in the world of faith. While many Christians would reject the view
of the world that sort of underwrites all of this we often approach
questions of faith still with the motivation of existential pain
management on the negative side and on the positive side the idea
of marketing the gospel. This is not just a liberal/conservative
issue. But I would not be surprised if liberals tended more
towards the notion of pain management and the conservatives more
towards marketing the gospel.

Now before going any further I want to say that I strongly believe
in be attentive to communicating the gospel well, and I also believe
that the truth has tremendous power to heal and that the gospel
even the very truth about existence itself is a word of healing to
the afflicted. I even suspect that this definition is helpful in
checking ourselves to make sure if we have understood it.

However, I want to point out a particular notion that it a good
litmus test of whether or not we have either a pragmatic or
therapeutic relationship to faith. This is the notion of God's
holiness. Now before going further I need to step back. Often God's
holiness is talked about in conversations about why he does not
tolerate sin. I don't disagree with this, but if we make this our
only discussion of holiness it will only be a sort of esoteric way
of referring to something more crassly put as the "rough edges" of
God. What I want to recover here is a sense of the overwhelming
wildness and tremendous immensity of God. The sort of terrifying
cliff-edge dizzyingness of the idea of the greatest, highest, most
important being in all of existence that has absolutely no need of
us but at the same time is deeply connected to and knowledgeable of
us. It is both the most foreign and familiar thing in all of existence.
Greater than any idea or picture we might ever come up with.

This is the subject of obedience and spirituality. Worshiping this
God is not something we do because it is good for us, but because
it is right. Following the words of this God are things that we
don't do just because they are good for us, but because he is the
one that defines reality itself. It is when we give self-concern in
these things up, though, that we find the greatest benefit to
ourselves. It is part of how seeking first the kingdom brings with
it all the other things that we strive for. The challenge though
returns us to the beginning of this: we have the challenge
of seeking God first not as a means but an end.

Though the good news is that God is merciful. Christ continually
reveals that he receives those merely looking for a healing of
their wounds and we should not expect that we are different than
those people. However, Christ is more than just salvation and that
is why gratitude make sense.  A bandage is used and forgotten, but
a free gift of healing requires a response.