+++
title = "Gifting and Belonging"
date = 2019-07-26T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

These posts are becoming increasingly personal lately, but I guess I
am okay with that for now. The thing on my mind today is that in my
life (and I think this is probably true for lots of people), I have
felt a pressure to be amazing in certain things. The reason I think
for this comes from a lot of places perfectionism being one of them,
but what has come to mind today is new. It is in two parts. The
first is that being amazing is a way of dodging anxiety of
judgement, and the second is that an un-ending striving for evidence
of competence can be a sign of an internal question about gifting
and belonging.

So we will start with the first one. There is a particular anxiety
that I experience as it relates to performance. Afterwards, I wonder
if people think I have done a bad job. This is probably related to
how judgmental I have been of people in the past. So my solution to
the anxiety is not to judge the quality of what I have done myself.
I renounce that work in favor of being amazing. If I amaze enough
people and get enough compliments then I can rest knowing that I
don't have to worry about what people are thinking. I will know what
they are thinking more or less and that then ends the anxiety.

This has some problems though. The main one being that it is
impossible to always amaze people and that compliments are not
always trustworthy. So it is not a real solution to the anxiety.
However, there is another problem though that is worse. Being overly
concerned with people's approval can at its worst result in not
caring if what you are saying is true or not. This is very dangerous
because under this motivaiton of pleasing others you can feel like a
success whether or not you are teaching lies. That is a big problem.

It would be better and more effective to come up with a way of
deciding for myself if I have done well or not. Other people would
be part of this, but shouldn't be a slave to people's reactions and
often their immediate reactions.

So now for the second part. I have discovered that with many things
that I do I find myself trying to reach a level of expertise that
will finally prove to myself that I belong in a certain role. This
creates a frantic sense of constant preparation and never being good
enough. Today though I have been thinking that actually it is not
premature to acknowledge that I have certain gifts and belong in a
certain role at least for the time being. I definitly can improve,
but I don't think I should worry anymore about whether or not I
should be doing what I am doing.

This is a pretty big revelation for me. And I am realizing more and
more how many of the things I have done recently and possibly life
plans I have had relate to the question of expertise as belonging. I
think this is one of the reasons that I have been wondering about
grad school. I want to belong in the world of ideas. Now I am
feeling some what sheepishly that in fact I do belong in the world
of ideas. Maybe I am more the guy that slovels poop in the world of
ideas than its king, but I think that I can at least say I belong. I
wonder how easy it will be to keep hold of this understanding of my
place.

I think that there is likely an interesting conversation to have on
this idea of expertise and belonging as it relates to identity. I
would like to think about this more. We often talk about finding our
identity with God and Christ. However, this language does not always
leave room in the world of action and expertise. Identity is just as
at work there though.
