+++
title = "New Schedules, Intuition and an Analysis of Lived Metaphor"
date = 2019-09-17T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

I am not sure if it is something about my personality, but I often
find myself very disrupted by changes in schedule. I have recently
had a major change in schedule and I am not quite sure what I think
about it.  Somethings things feel a little too free. When we can do
anything we often don't no where to start and I feel a bit that way
today. Classic despair of possibility. I even has on of Kierkegaard's
books sitting on my desk right now. Maybe I will read it or
something.

A further difficulty of days like today is that today is a day off.
I have already created a work schedule for myself. If it were a
workday then I would not have to worry about it as much. However,
there is usually an intuitive element to what I do on days off for
me, and I think that intuition is a bit stunted by changes in
schedule. Intuition is likely based at least in part on past
experiences and that goes out the window when we face change. So if
you are someone who uses intuition a lot either in your rest time or
your work time then you are likely to have some issues when your
schedule changes.

I have to admit that even when it comes to planned daily work I tend
to be a very intuitive person. I tend to want to do what feels
right. The reason for this is that often my performance at least
seems to be much better when I am flowing in the stream of
intuition. It can be hard to push through in a productive way
without it.

However, I have noticed that this might in part be objectively
untrue. It feels true but I have at least on some occasions noticed
that my work is still at least decent when I am just slogging
through it. So I am not sure ultimately about this yet.

Another possibility is that confidence is part of the experience of
intuition and the desire to do well and the uncertainty that comes
with most work combine with a new schedule to create enough
instability to make it impossible to continue forward in certain
work. This can be particularly bad when the pressure is on.

What seems to mitigate this in these situations is the creation of
some sort of mental model of the new schedule. Perhaps drawing some
on the ideas of _Metaphors We Live By_ (Lakoff & Johnson 1981) we
establish an set metaphors that have come to structure the aspects
of our different kinds of days. These metaphors then can be extended
and it is their extension that creates intuitions about behaviors
and plans.

Then perhaps the solution is to consider what metaphors have been
lost in the change of schedule and to think some about what has
replaced them. As I think of this I have a feeling that I often have
about the ideas in _Metaphors We Live By_ and that is that while I am
sure that there are previous structuring experiences I do wonder how
easily they can be turned into metaphors. But let's give it a go.

So my typical day off starts out with two warring desires. The first
is an hedonic desire to do whatever, it is that I want to do, and
the second is a desire to go something good and admirable. These
often present themselves as a desire for the same thing because I
find working on some sort of impressive project very enjoyable at
first. The war starts later when things get difficult. Then
afterwards I lament the amount of time that has been used up in the
day, and how little has been accomplished and how I feel betrayed by
my projects and how little they have satisfied my desire to do
something that I am proud of.

Then there is a low period.

Then towards dinner I often pull out of this and then mostly enjoy
the evening with my wife.

Okay so are there any metaphors in here?

I suppose I have a misleading metaphor of day-off as empty platform.
It is totally free from constraints. And this I guess then meshes
with my typical metaphor for why I can't accomplish what I want. I
am constrained by time and exhaustion. So the day off is a day of
freedom from constraint and freedom to do.

However, there are still some constraints. The metaphor of day off
as free playing field hide time constraints and also constraints of
ability. These two things are often what is behind frustrations on
other days as well.

And I experience frustration regularly because there are some lies
backed into my metaphors and the way they are form and are shaped by
my desires.

So how does this fit in with the absence of the old schedule. I
suppose part of it is that sense my schedule has changed I don't
feel the same sorts of desire for the removal of constraints. I am
not worn out and needing rest. At least, not in the normal way.
Also, I am a bit discontent with the way I have been doing days off
lately: a tendency towards escapism that I don't like.

Anyway I can see that there is a lack of intuition because part of
the content of typical metaphor of release of constraint is no
longer entirely accurate to my felt experience. So, what then to do?
How can I look at today not as a removal of constraint, but
something else. What else is there? Opportunity for trying new and
old things? This still has the notion of freedom that is a big part
of day's off, but at the same time it does not rely in constraints.

I am not sure if thinking this way will help anything, but I do find
it interesting.
