+++
title = "The Need of Uninhibited Productivity"
date = 2019-07-23T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

I am not sure if I will publish this or not. It is something that
has been on my mind lately and I am don't think I have finished
thinking about it. I felt the need from the title several times in
my life, but it was most intense I remember when I was working as a
programmer.

I got a strong taste of it again the other day when I was looking at
programming job postings. It brought back memories from when I was
trying to get started in programming years ago. It is a particularly
strange feeling. I will try to describe it.

The way it starts is looking at various challenges and telling
myself in a rushed sort of anxious way yeah I can do that. That is
easy. Then I have coupled with it this dream of being able to do the
job both brilliantly and competently. Even now I feel a pull to try
to learn and be brilliant. There is a strong push to accomplish
enough that I feel at peace. It is a frantic feeling, and I have
found it keeping me from actually learning well. In my haste I tend
to close my eyes to nuances and also panic at any little difficulty.

This really is one of the least wise frames of mind that I get into.
I think it is rooted maybe a little deeper than I had thought
before. In the past I thought that it had to do with old work
struggles, but now I am wondering if it goes back to the way that I
felt when I left L'Abri the first time. The feeling of both
excitement and fear as I thought about my leaving behind grad school
plans. I think that writing papers for school is possibly part of
the archeology of this experience I have. I am not sure yet though.
I find it pretty mystifying.
