+++
title = "Typical Experiences"
date = 2019-07-16T00:00:00+02:00
draft = false
+++

We have certain experiences that we see as typical to us. This is
interesting. We can tell a lot about what we think of ourselves and
our identities by what experiences we call typical. What is
interesting about them is that the list of things that we do that
we see as typical does not necessarily match up with what we
actually do all the time. You see this kind of behavior in people
who are particularly hard on themselves. Failure is typical and
success is a freak accident. This is amusingly still believed even
when in that person's life the number of successes way over
balances the number of failures.

Typical experiences flow out of who we think we are. They are
expressions and manifestations of our identity. They allow us to
have an existence within the constant ebb and flow of our
experiences. They keep us from seeing things like our digestion and
sweating as core to who we are. I would not want to live without
this function of my identity, but it can often deceive us. Our
subjective experience of ourselves can become strongly skewed and
this likely by the same mechanism that helps us filter the signal
from the noise in our day to day experience. Somehow we can get
confused about what is the signal in our experiences and what is
the noise. This confusion comes from a core interpretive mistake
about who we are.

I know of no quick fix for this, but it is a call to look at other
voices in determining who we are and especially the meaning of
events in our lives. We too often jump to conclusions based on a
clear idea of who we think we are. Maybe a good way forward is to
think about the experiences themselves as if they were a part of
another person we did not know. What would we assume about this
person's identity and how would that contrast with ours.
